---
published: true
title: My touch-typing journey
layout: post
---
Recently (and  by recently I mean half a year ago) I finally learned to type. Yes, I have a confession to make - all these years I've been a developer, and I never learned touch-typing. And I always wanted to - I tried, and I tried, and I failed over and over. Why? I think there are 3 reasons for this:

1) The tools at hand sucked. They really did - I've been struggling to get a good and working keyboard trainer, but most of them was intended not for learning, but for training. What does it mean? It means they implied you already know where each letter is, and what finger do you use to push it. To learn this part was impossible for me.  When I came back to this lately - the situation improved a lot - there are a lot of websites that teach you how to type, and they suck much less - I spent just 4 days on typing.com, and that was all it took from me to be done with the difficult part.

2)Multiple layouts. I always envied people whose native language consists of latin alphabets - they don't know the horror of switching keyboard layouts left and right. It is agonizing, and one major pain in the ass is that cyrillic alphabet is bigger. This means there are more letters for the same amount of keys. But the real problem is layout. Basically to effectively touch type I would have to learn not 1 but 2 very different layouts. This always have been a major demotivator each time I tried to teach myself to touch type. However I found an answer to this one. There is QWERTY for latin, and there is ЙЦУКЕН for cyrillic. They are not the only layouts, but they are the default ones everywhere. However, ЙЦУКЕН does not make sense to someone who uses both layouts. Why? Because for most cyrillic letters there are latin letters with the same sound, and it is very, very, utterly stupid to have THE SAME SOUNDS at completely different locations, yet having latin C and cyrillic С on the same key, when they look alike, but they don't make the same sound! But there is a simple answer to this, gladly - just use ЯВЕРТЫ, also known as a phonetic layout. This way you have to remember just a few keys, and the rest are positioned on the corresponding keys. So T = Т instead of T = Е. There are, however, major tradeoffs - now some keys are on the number row, so typing them are awkward, but the character "Ё" being one of the awkward ones is deprecated, and is not really used anymore, and the character "ъ"  is pretty rare as well. I can live with it, so there - my solution was switching to alternate layout.

3)My lack of attention. Although I made this one the last one - it is probably the strongest one - I struggle to keep attention on something for a long period of time, and learning to type requires hours of repetitive and  boring training in order to work. So with a lot of distractions around it became insanely difficult for me to maintain the training for long enough.  But I am really glad I managed to fight it for long enough to master it  - it was very worth it. In fact I feel like learning this was more useful than my entire university education. How I managed to convince myself to keep focused? I promised myself a reward. I decided that once I learn to touch type I would get a mechanical keyboard, and I did. As I found out mechanical keyboards are really great, but this is the topic for entire another post.

So, what now when I can type? Welp, I still type at 50 WPM right now, and I want to improve it - so I am playing Epistory, and I am loving every single bit of it. I must say I feel really good - this is the most liberating thing a computer user might learn - once you are typing properly you can take advantage of such amazing software as NeoVim or i3wm, and looking at the screen while typing feels very satisfying too. I wanted to try out other layouts apart from QWERTY too, but I'll talk about this in the next post.