---
published: true
title: A little dead miracle I craved and then discarded
layout: post
---
Sometimes with all the crazy tech progress flashing right before my eyes I struggle to keep up, and sometimes I just plainly refuse to - for example the whole microblogging thing got right past me, and I still don't get it. But here is the one thing I just can't understand, bare with me for a second: We don't have real smartphones in 2016. Now this sounds loud, and it is not completely true, but we would get to it a bit later. So here is the story.

Back in 2010 I really wanted a smartphone, and I got myself a N900. I did not liked it too much - it was... a bit weird, and it was my first smartphone - before I only had j2me smartphones, and N900 really felt like a smartphone - essentially it was a pocket computer with an occasional ability to use it for calls. It was capable of running vim, ssh sessions, and pretty much anything I could do at the time. Yet it was not without flaws - the battery life was AWFUL compared to any old phone - half a day versus a week! It also seemed severely underpowered in CPU department - 600MHz was not enough for some things, thus it could never fully replace the laptop for me. All this considered it still felt like a true smartphone - a computer in your pocket. And then the dark times came. Few years gone by and I felt more and more that I needed an upgrade - N900 was struggling to get a usable web browser as its aging flash version went out of date, and websites kept getting heavier, so I really wanted an upgrade. The best one to date seemed to be Sony Xperia Pro, and It had that modern Android 2.3 that was oh-so-good for everything, while Maemo (a debian based system of N900) was slowly descending to the coffin. So I googled Android briefly, and I saw that it is also Linux based. Naturally It was a no-brainer, after all I always preferred Sony Ericsson phones over Nokia's. So I bought it and... You know, if you want to boil a living frog, you should not dunk it to the boiling water right on, because if you do dunk it in it would panic and jump out, so you should instead put it in a cold water, and then slowly heat it to the boiling point - this way the frog would not feel how hot the water is, because some flaw in frog's brain ignores slow rising temperature until the frog is boiled alive. That's what started happening to me. Android felt weird - it had a VERY good browser, it was a major improvement over any browser available to Maemo user, furthermore, the applications amount in Android Market was insane (however at that time Android market was a wild west with tons of trash and "hello world" applications), the keyboard was infinitely better than the one N900 had, it was more powerful in any way possible, and it was more lightweight. Yet it does not felt like a smartphone anymore. First thing I noticed that bothered me a lot was that even though the phone had a full qwerty keyboard almost each and any app I used was optimized for vertical usage. The whole system was. So I found myself constantly flipping out keyboard just to type something, and then flipping the phone back to hold it vertically. It was a minor thing, but it was annoying. The second thing I noticed is that there was no multitasking at all in this thing - whenever I've been leaving web browser It would unload and then redownload all the pages again, just like my old j2me phones. At that time I used Jabber a lot for instant messaging, so this behaviour considered it was agonising to use XMPP on Android - any existing client would be killed immediately if Android felt like it was eating up to much of precious RAM, or if you would lock your phone. The connection would be lost, and so you would not be notified about new messages, and all your contacts would see you being offline. Now that was really, really bad, but all the good things made me stay on the platform. Also Android would make you jump through the hoops just to get root access to your device, and  it has so much limitations to everything - the software really did felt like a major stepback from Maemo. Installing CyanogenMod partially returned the feeling of control over OS, but it have never been the same. After Xperia pro was Photon Q - the last QWERTY phone I had - I had no choice at that point. It was the ONLY up to date QWERTY phone running android, and it needed some soldering to work in GSM networks, yet it worked, and I got really used to Android at that point. Unluckily enough I broke Photon Q VERY fast - it cracked the screen on the first fall.... into snow. Yes, that is right - soft mushy snow, and the touchscreen is cracked. When that happened I had a flashback of my N900 falling into the snow and getting RUNNED OVER BY A CAR, and then me running to the place it was burried into, and digging it out in panic. The phone was in a solid compressed snow brick after being run over, yet after cleaning it was 100% working, and it was not even scratched! And now, some years later I am here with Photon Q, a device as powerful as a few N900 combined, yet it could not stand a fraction of punishment N900 stood up to without a single scratch. So I decided - no more Photon Q for me, it is too fragile, and I am not going to have a spare in my pocket - I am not that rich after all. And, while looking for replacement it finally hit me - the frog was dead and boiled at that time. The smartphones were no more. Android took over the alternative phone os market - there was Apple and there was Android, nothing else (Windows Mobile was born dead, so I am not counting this in, never). And in Apple camp things was even worse. 
I gave up, and got myself a Samsung phone - I don't even remember the model, and it finally felt just like a phone and nothing else. No more had I a computer in my pocket, now I merely had a regular phone with a big screen. Why am I writing this whole thing again? Because it is 2016, and I am waiting for my new phone to arrive, and in the meantime I am using N900 as my phone, because I don't have anything else at the moment. Nokia is long dead - killed by Microsoft just like Netscape or OS/2, there are no Android QWERTY phones released later than 3 years ago. By returning to N900 event for a brief moment I realised how much the whole definition of smartphone changed with time, and a bright future once promised by N900 is now dead. Or at least I thought it was! 
I can't believe this, but I can in fact end this on a bright note, because I just realised there is hope, and now more than ever - it is the time for Linux to truly shine once more. WIth things like Raspberry Pi and C.H.I.P. coming out as a very cheap computer platforms we now have open hardware capable of running smartphones just fine, and it turned out unlike me there are people who never let go of N900 - there is a project called Neo900 - a new motherboard that reuses old N900 parts to make a fully open smartphone with more up to date specs. RIght now the community is really hyped for this, and N900 fans are willing to pay 900EUR for a just a new motherboard. At the same time Ubuntu touch - a Ubuntu Linux based mobile OS is also getting more and more traction. 
So I have hope now, and I am confused - some people are paying 900EUR for just a motherboard (and it is not like Neo900 is impressive - it just has one core running at 1GHz), some people in 2016 storm forum with someone selling N950 prototype - this all means that real smartphones are still a big market with no one to feed it. 

Maybe some of these days I would find it in me to make my own true smartphone - I've been thinking about this for a long time now. We shall see.